GEMINI-CURSES(1)           User Commands           GEMINI-CURSES(1)

NAME
    gemini-curses - ncurses terminal interface for the Gemini API

SYNOPSIS
    gemini-curses
    gemini-curses <session_name>
    gemini-curses --resume <session_name>
    gemini-curses --list
    gemini-curses --models
    gemini-curses --update-models
    gemini-curses --test-model <model_id>
    gemini-curses --version
    gemini-curses --help

DESCRIPTION
    gemini-curses is a Python ncurses interface for Gemini. It is the
    full-screen terminal interface companion to the Bash gemini-cli tool.

    It provides:
        - scrollable transcript area
        - multiline input box
        - wrapped input display
        - mousewheel scrolling
        - mouse-assisted input cursor placement
        - named and resumable sessions
        - session rename support
        - session file browser
        - timestamped logs
        - rolling conversation context
        - memory snapshot storage in session logs
        - view/edit current memory
        - attachment extraction for code blocks
        - local file attachment support
        - generated inlineData attachment saving
        - cached model list support
        - explicit model-list update workflow
        - metadata-based model filtering
        - token-limit model filtering
        - preview/experimental model hiding
        - in-app model selection
        - user-operated model testing
        - in-app API key management
        - w3m-style options form
        - external editor support
        - credits/about screen

USAGE
    First-time setup from inside the interface:

        gemini-curses
            Press F3 to paste an API key.
            Press F2 to open the model menu.
            Choose "Update model list from Google" only when ready.
            Choose or test a model.

    Start a normal timestamped chat:

        gemini-curses

    Start a named full-screen chat:

        gemini-curses android-backup

    Resume a named chat:

        gemini-curses --resume android-backup

    List saved chats:

        gemini-curses --list

    List cached Gemini models, fetching only if no cache exists:

        gemini-curses --models

    Force-refresh the local model cache from Google:

        gemini-curses --update-models

    Test one model from the shell:

        gemini-curses --test-model gemini-2.5-flash

SESSION MANAGEMENT
    gemini-curses
        Start a new timestamped session.

    gemini-curses <name>
        Start or open a named session.

    gemini-curses --resume <name>
        Resume an existing named session. If the session does not exist,
        the command exits with an error.

    gemini-curses --list
        List saved sessions.

    F4
        Open the in-app session browser. The session browser can open an
        existing session, start a new timestamped session, or rename the
        current session.

CONTROLS
    F1
        Open the actionable command menu.

    Enter
        Insert newline in the input box.

    Ctrl+G
        Send the current message.

    F2
        Open the model menu. This does not automatically contact Google.

        The model menu can:
            - use the cached model list
            - update the model list from Google
            - test the current/fallback model
            - enter a model ID manually
            - save the current model to config

    F3
        Open API-key manager.

    F4
        Open session browser.

    F5
        Open options form.

    F6
        Open memory menu.

    F7
        Open file/attachment menu.

    F8
        Edit current prompt in external editor.

    F9
        Show credits/about screen.

    F10
    Ctrl+Q
        Quit the interface.

    PgUp
        Scroll transcript upward.

    PgDn
        Scroll transcript downward.

    Arrow keys
        Move cursor inside the input box or navigate menus.

    Home
    End
        Move cursor to beginning or end of current input line.

    Ctrl+U
        Clear current input.

    Ctrl+L
        Redraw screen.

    Tab
        Insert four spaces in the input box. In the options form, Tab moves
        to the next field.

GLOBAL FUNCTION-KEY NAVIGATION
    Function keys are global navigation keys.

    When a feature screen, menu, error page, or dialog is open, pressing
    another function key jumps directly to that feature without requiring the
    user to press Esc first.

    Examples:
        F1 -> F5
            Open help, then jump directly to options.

        F2 -> F3
            Open model menu, then jump directly to API-key manager.

    This behavior is intended to make the command menu and function-key bar
    behave as launchers, not merely as labels.

MOUSE SUPPORT
    Mouse support depends on terminal emulator support for ncurses mouse
    events.

    Main chat view:

        Mouse wheel up
            Scroll transcript upward toward older output.

        Mouse wheel down
            Scroll transcript downward toward newer output.

        Left click in input area
            Place the input cursor near the clicked position.

        Left click visible command labels
            Launch that command.

    Lists and selectors:

        Mouse wheel up/down
            Move through visible rows.

        Left click row
            Highlight or select the clicked row.

        Double click row
            Activate the clicked row where supported.

    Drag selection is not implemented by gemini-curses. Terminal text
    selection remains the terminal emulator's responsibility.

MODEL DISCOVERY
    Available Gemini models can be listed from the command line:

        gemini-curses --models

    The --models command uses the local model cache if available. If no cache
    exists, it fetches the list from Google and creates the cache. The output
    includes model IDs, display names, token limits, and supported methods.

    To force-refresh the cache:

        gemini-curses --update-models

    Models can also be listed directly with curl:

        curl "https://generativelanguage.googleapis.com/v1beta/models?key=YOUR_API_KEY"

MODEL CACHE
    The default model cache path is:

        ~/.cache/gemini-cli/models.json

    F2 does not automatically hit the network.

    Inside the model menu:

        Use cached model list
            Opens the local cache if available.

        Update model list from Google
            Explicitly fetches the model list from Google and updates the
            cache.

    This avoids accidental network/API calls when the user merely presses F2.

MODEL METADATA FILTERS
    The model selector uses metadata returned by the Gemini model-list endpoint
    instead of guessing which future model names will be useful.

    Press f in the model selector to open the model filter screen.

    Available filters include:

        Require input/output token limits > 0
            Hides models that do not report usable token limits.

        Hide preview/experimental/beta models
            Hides models whose ID, display name, API name, or description
            appears to mark them as preview, experimental, exp, or beta.

        Minimum input token limit
            Hides models whose inputTokenLimit is below the configured value.

        Minimum output token limit
            Hides models whose outputTokenLimit is below the configured value.

        Sort order
            Sort by API model name, display name, input-token limit, or
            output-token limit.

    These filters do not send generation requests. They operate only on cached
    or freshly loaded listModels metadata. The user-operated model tester
    remains available with t for testing one highlighted model.

MODEL TESTING
    Autoscan has been removed.

    Instead of probing every model until one works, gemini-curses now uses a
    user-operated model tester.

    In the model list:

        t
            Test the selected model with MODEL_TEST_PROMPT and display the
            raw response.

    From the shell:

        gemini-curses --test-model <model_id>

    The tester sends one request to the selected model. The user reads the
    response and decides whether to activate or save the model.

OPTIONS FORM
    F5 opens a w3m-style options form.

    The options form shows all editable config-backed values together instead
    of opening a separate blank screen for every option.

    Controls:
        Space
            Toggle boolean fields.

        Enter
            Edit text, integer, or path fields.

        Tab
            Move to the next field.

        s
            Save all staged changes.

        r
            Reset the form from current runtime values.

        Esc/q
            Cancel. If changes are unsaved, the user is asked before
            discarding.

    API keys are not edited in the options form. Use F3.

    Project metadata such as the GitHub URL is not edited in the options form.
    Use F9 to view credits/about information.

CONFIGURATION
    Configuration file:

        ~/.config/gemini-cli/config

    The ncurses version intentionally uses the same configuration file as
    the Bash version.

    Supported keys:

        MODEL
            Gemini model identifier.

        CONTEXT_TURNS
            Number of recent user/assistant exchanges sent back to Gemini as
            conversation context.

            Default: 12

        HISTORY_LIMIT
            Legacy alias for CONTEXT_TURNS. Kept for compatibility with older
            config files.

        GEMINI_API_KEY
            Optional API key. Environment variable takes priority.

        SESSION_DIR
            Directory used for session log storage.
            Default: ~/.gpt

        ATTACHMENT_DIR
            Directory used for extracted code artifacts and generated inline
            attachments.
            Default: SESSION_DIR/attachments

        EDITOR
            External editor command used by F8 and memory editing.

        MODEL_TEST_PROMPT
            Prompt sent by the model tester.

        MODEL_CACHE_FILE
            Path to the local cached model-list JSON file.

        MODEL_FILTER_GENERATE_CONTENT
            If enabled, the model selector shows only models whose
            supportedGenerationMethods include generateContent.

        MODEL_FILTER_REQUIRE_TOKENS
            If enabled, the model selector hides models without positive
            input/output token limits.

        MODEL_FILTER_HIDE_PREVIEW
            If enabled, the model selector hides preview, experimental, exp,
            and beta-looking models.

        MODEL_MIN_INPUT_TOKENS
            Minimum inputTokenLimit required for display in the model selector.

        MODEL_MIN_OUTPUT_TOKENS
            Minimum outputTokenLimit required for display in the model selector.

        MODEL_SORT_ORDER
            Model selector sort order. Supported values are api, name,
            display, input-desc, and output-desc.

        INPUT_PLACEHOLDER
            Placeholder displayed in the empty input field.

        MONOCHROME
            If enabled, avoids relying on dim/grey display distinctions.

        STARTUP_NOTICE
            Controls the temporary remfan1994 startup notice in blank new
            sessions.

ENVIRONMENT
    GEMINI_API_KEY
        Preferred API key source.

        Precedence:
            1. Environment variable
            2. Config file
            3. F3 runtime API-key input

    VISUAL
    EDITOR
        Used for external editor support if EDITOR is not set in config.

API KEY STORAGE
    API keys are not saved by default when pasted with F3.

    Saving the API key to config is optional and must be selected explicitly.
    Saving stores the key in plaintext.

FILES
    ~/.config/gemini-cli/config
        Configuration file.

    ~/.cache/gemini-cli/models.json
        Default cached Gemini model list. This path may be changed with
        MODEL_CACHE_FILE.

    SESSION_DIR/*.log
        Session log files.

    ATTACHMENT_DIR/
        Extracted code block attachments, generated inlineData attachments,
        and other saved artifacts.

ATTACHMENT SYSTEM
    Code blocks returned by Gemini are extracted from terminal display and
    saved into ATTACHMENT_DIR.

    The original raw Gemini response remains preserved in the session log.

    Local files can be attached to the next prompt through F7.

    Text-like files are included as text parts. Binary/media files are sent as
    Gemini REST inlineData parts when possible.

    Generated inlineData parts returned by Gemini are saved into ATTACHMENT_DIR
    and represented in the transcript by attachment notices.

MEMORY MODEL
    gemini-curses keeps a rolling conversation context in memory.

    CONTEXT_TURNS controls how many recent user/assistant exchanges are sent
    back to Gemini with each request.

    Memory snapshots are written into the session log as system entries.
    When resuming an existing session, gemini-curses prefers the latest memory
    snapshot and falls back to rebuilding context from recent chat entries.

    F6 opens the memory menu. The memory menu can view, edit, clear, or rebuild
    current memory.

EXTERNAL EDITOR
    F8 opens the current prompt in an external editor.

    The editor is chosen in this order:
        1. EDITOR config key
        2. VISUAL environment variable
        3. EDITOR environment variable
        4. vi fallback

CREDITS
    F9 opens the credits/about screen.

LIMITATIONS
    - Requires Python 3 with curses support
    - Requires internet access for Gemini calls
    - API quota restrictions apply
    - Model cache may become stale until updated
    - Model metadata filters depend on the metadata returned by Google
    - Preview/experimental hiding uses name and description heuristics
    - Model testing verifies only the selected model
    - Model testing does not guarantee overall model quality
    - Mouse support depends on terminal emulator support for ncurses mouse events
    - Terminal text selection and copy behavior remain terminal-emulator features
    - Drag selection is not implemented by gemini-curses
    - Local media attachment support depends on Gemini model/API support
    - Generated image/video support depends on response parts returned by the model

VERSION
    gemini-curses version 0.7.1

AUTHOR
    Part of the gemini-terminal-tools project.
